---
date: "2017-04-06T00:00:00Z"
summary: The relationship between designers and software engineers.
title: Design and Code
---
## Road

For a long time I have wanted to build something from scratch that people would
love and use. I have a decent job, where I have an impact. But I would like to
create something that solves a problem from beginning to end. As a backend
engineer, I make internals of systems. When solving an issue for an average
person, an API is not enough - users interact with software via user interface,
something that I have always neglected. Command line tool is all I need to
interact with the program. But this is not a common way of using computers.

I decided it was time to communicate with the User. My platform of choice became
iOS and the Swift language. After a couple weeks of learning how to build apps,
I realized two things.

Because I want my code to be perfect and error-prone I never finish anything. I
spend all the time focusing on the fist module, making it perfect. Refactoring
it so it is a "native" code for the language. Easy to read. Easy to understand.
You can spend a lifetime on 100 lines of code making it perfect. There will
always be something to improve. What I forgot is that the code was a means of
communication. Code talks to the user but also the fellow programmers. I
completely forgot about the fact that the code was meant to do something useful.
When having good tools (XCode is quite good at this) creating user interface is
something special. Previously I tried HTML/CSS/JS and instead of making UI i
used to struggle to make interface look like I imagined. When tools are not in
my way I started to think about the actual user experience. And then I drifted
to completely new waters.

## Design

Let’s be honest. I know nothing about design. But I was intrigued. I have a
friend who always drew nice pictures on the back of his notebook at school, now
he is a designer. After a quick Skype he pointed me to a few design tools:
Sketch, Flinto, Avocode and others. I ended up doing mockups in Flinto with only
rectangles. It was fun. After I finished, I had a complete "clickable" version.
I had the vision for the app, I knew what it was going to look like.

And because of my obsession with code quality, I got stuck on Register/Log-in
module.  As I got frustrated with lack of progress I stopped developing the
project.

After a couple of months, I saw "[Abstract: The Art of
Design](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt6333098/)" on Netflix. Just the first
episode. Then I watched
"[Objectified](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ty0fGn8fiUU)". I was enlightened.

It hit me.

Designers are the real interface to the industry world. They are the hackers,
who make today’s inventions usable by others.

## Code

But what about us programmers, software engineers? Are we just dumb
code-monkeys?

Yes and No.

All what dev ( developers?)do is translating natural language to the one that
the machine can understand. We can make an art of it, but the end user will not
see the difference. Of course you can argue that a clean and beautiful code is
less buggy, but that is not the point. The actual art behind programming to me
is being able to take a slice of reality and formalize it as code. That is the
line of communication between user and the program - finding the right
abstractions that will encapsulate the logic into one coherent piece of
functionality. But this is not the art of programming that we strive for.

What we appreciate the most is what we see. The code itself. We love to make it
readable, pure, short and concise. While users of your program will not care
about the code itself - people who write it tend to care about it more than the
product that the code constitutes. Nonetheless, the code itself is the way of
communication with other programmers and therefore a form of design.

## Both

Worlds of design and software development have a lot in common. At some level
they are both all about communication and solving problems in the most efficient
way. Take IKEA for example. People say that the quality of their products is
low. Maybe the piece of wood they used is not the best one, but I always feel
that every product was carefully designed. No pointless parts, wasted space,
unusable features.

We often do not appreciate a good design - maybe because a good design is hidden
from the user. Like an operating system – as long as you are not aware of it, it
does its job.
